+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - Scan Session Tool - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +
|                                                                           |
|        A tool for MR scan session documentation and data archiving        |
|                                                                           |
|             Authors: Florian Krause <f.krause@donders.ru.nl>              |
|                      Nikos Kogias <n.kogias@donders.ru.nl>                |
|                                                                           |
+ - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - +



=================================== About ===================================

There is an urgent need to improve the reproducibility of (functional) MRI
research through transparent reporting, but standardization in this domain is
currently lacking. Shared MR images are often only made available after
transformation into a derivative data format (e.g. BIDS;
https://bids.neuroimaging.io/), and scan session documentation is commonly
either manually implemented (e.g. with hand written notes) or neglected
entirely.

Scan Session Tool was written to fill this gap, and to be used by
neuroscientists, to help them increase transparency and reproducibilty of
their MRI research by standardizing scan session documentation and raw data
archiving.

The Scan Session Tool is a graphical application for documenting (f)MRI scan
sessions and automatized data archiving. Information about the scan session
itself, used forms and documents, as well as the single measurements can be
entered and saved into a protocol file. This information can furthermore be
used to copy acquired data (DICOM images as well as optional stimulation
protocols and logfiles into a specific hierarchical folder structure for
unified archiving purposes, with optional sepcial support for
(Turbo-)BrainVoyager (https://brainvoyager.com).



=============================== Documentation ===============================

--------------------------------- Interface ---------------------------------

The user interface is organized into three different content areas, each hol-
ding different information about the scan session, as well as an additional
control area for opening and saving session information and for automatically
archiving acquired data, based on the session information.


----------------------- The "General Information" area ----------------------

This area provides input fields for basic information about the scan session.
Some of the fields allow for a selection of pre-specified values taken from
a config file (see below), while others take freely typed characters. Fields
that are marked with a red background, are mandatory and need to be filled
in. Fields that are marked with an orange background are automatically filled
in, but need to be checked.
The following fields are available:
    "Project"        - The project identifier
                       (free-type and selection)
    "Subject"        - The subject number
                       (001-999)
                     - The subject type
                       (free-type and selection)
    "Session"        - The session number
                       (001-999)
                     - The session type
                       (free-type and selection)
    "Date"           - The date of the scan session
                       (free-type, auto-filled)
    "Time A"         - The main time period (e.g. official scanner booking)
                       (free-type)
    "Time B"         - An additional time period (e.g. actual scanner usage)
                       (free-type)
    "User 1"         - The main user (e.g. responsible MR operator)
                       (free-type and selection)
    "User 2"         - An additional user (e.g. back-up/buddy)
                       (free-type and selection)
    "Notes"          - Any additional notes about the session
                       (free-type)


--------------------------- The "Documents" area ----------------------------

This area provides input fields for additional documents that are acquired
during the session, such as logfiles and behavioural data files, as well as
questionnaires and forms that are filled in by the participant. The
following input fields are available:
    "Files"       - A newline separated list of all session logfiles and ad-
                    ditional documents; wildcard masks (*) will be completed
                    during archiving
                    (free-type)
    "Checklist"   - Checkboxes to specify which forms and documents have been
                    collected from the participant. Additional documents can
                    be specified in a configuration file (see "Config File"
                    section). The following checkboxes are available:
                    "MR Safety Screening Form"            - The (f)MRI scree-
                                                            ning form provi-
                                                            ded by the scan-
                                                            ning institution
                    "Participation Informed Consent Form" - The official MRI
                                                            written consent
                                                            form


------------------------- The "Measurements" area ---------------------------

This area provides several input fields for each measurement of the session.
When starting the application, only one (empty) measurement is shown. Click-
ing on "Add Measurement" will create additional measurements. Fields that are
marked with a red background, are mandatory and need to be filled in. Fields
that are marked with an orange background are automatically filled in, but
need to be checked.
The following input fields are available per measurement:
    "No"                   - The number of the measurement
                             (001-999)
    "Type"                 - "anat", "func" or "misc"
                             (selection)
    "Vols"                 - The number of volumes of the measurement
                             (free-type)
    "Name"                 - The name of the measurement
                             (free-type, selection)
    "Logfiles"             - A newline separated list of all connected
                             logfiles; wildcard masks (*) will be completed
                             during archiving (please note that a stimulation
                             protocol mask will be included automatically,
                             based on the session information)
                             (free-type)
    "Comments"             - Any additional comments about the measurement
                             (free-type)


----------------------------- The control area ------------------------------

The control area consists of the following three buttons:
    "Open"    - Opens previously saved information from a text file
    "Save"    - Saves the entered session information into a text file
    "Archive" - Copies acquired data from a specified source folder into a
                target folder at another specified location. Please note that
                all data are expected to be within the specified source fol-
                der. That is, all DICOM files (*.dcm OR *.IMA; with or with-
                out sub-folders), all stimulation protocols and all logfiles.
                Optionally, links to the DICOM images in BrainVoyager and
                Turbo-BrainVoyager formats can be created. Turbo-BrainVoyager
                files and data will be manipulated to work in the target
                directory.
                The data will be copied into the following folder hierarchy:
                    DICOMs -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/<Type>/
                      <No>-<Name>/<DICOM>/
                    Logfiles -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/<Type>/
                      <No>-<Name>/
                    Files -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/
                    BrainVoyager files (links only, optional) -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/<BV>/
                    Turbo-BrainVoyager files (links only, optional) -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/<TBV>/
                    Scan Session Protocol -->
                      <Project>/sub-<Subject>/ses-<Session>/


================================ Config File ================================

A configuration file can be created to pre-define the values to be used as
selection options for the "Subject", "Session", "Certified User", "Backup
Person", "Notes", the measurement "Name", "Vols" and "Comments" on a per
project basis, as well as additional items in the "Files" and "Checklist"
fields of the "Documents" section. The Scan Session Tool will look for a con-
figuration file with the name "sst.yaml", located in the current working di-
rectory or in the $HOME folder.

The syntax is YAML. Here is an example:

Project 1:
    SubjectTypes:
        - Group1
        - Group2

    SessionTypes:
        - Sess1
        - Sess2

    Users:
        - User1
        - User2

    Backups:
        - User1
        - User2

    Notes: |
           Subject details
           ---------------

           Age:
           Gender: m[ ] f[ ]

    Files:
        - "*.txt"

    Checklist:
        - Pre-Scan Questionnaire
        - Post-Scan Questionnaire

    Measurements anat:
        - Name:        Localizer
          Vols:        3

        - Name:        Anatomy
          Vols:        192

    Measurements func:
        - Name:        Run1
          Vols:        300
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 1:

        - Name:        Run2
          Vols:        400
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 2:

        - Name:        Run3
          Vols:        200
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 3:

    Measurements misc:
        - Name:        Run1incomplete
          Vols:
          Comments:


Project 2:
    SubjectTypes:
        - GroupA
        - GroupB

    SessionTypes:
        - SessA
        - SessB

    Users:
        - UserA
        - UserB

    Backups:
        - UserA
        - UserB

    Notes: |
           Subject details
           ---------------

           Age:
           Gender: m[ ] f[ ]

    Files:
        - "*.txt"

    Checklist:
        - Participation Reimbursement Form

    Measurements anat:
        - Name:        Localizer
          Vols:        3

        - Name:        MPRAGE
          Vols:        192

    Measurements func:
        - Name:        RunA
          Vols:        300
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 1:

        - Name:        RunB
          Vols:        400
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 2:

        - Name:        RunC
          Vols:        200
          Comments:    |
                       Answer 3:

    Measurements misc:
        - Name:        RunAImcomplete
          Vols:
          Comments:

================================= Tutorial =================================

For a detailed step-by-step guide on how to use the Scan Session Tool you 
can follow the link: 
https://github.com/fladd/ScanSessionTool/tree/master/tutorial/
